ramājāne jāne yadiha tava bhakteṣu vibhavo
na sadyassampadyastadiha madakṛttvādaśaminām |
praśāntiṃ kṛtvaiva pradiśasi tata: kāmamakhilaṃ
praśānteṣu kṣipraṃ na khalu bhavadīye cyutikathā ||1||
ramājāne	O Consort of Laxmi (Ramaa)
jāne yat-iha	I know that here
tava bhakteṣu vibhava:	to Thy devotees prosperity
na sadya:-sampadya:-	does not quickly come
tat-iha	that (prosperity) here
mada-kṛttvāt-	(because is) pride generating
aśaminām	of the passionate
praśāntiṃ kṛtvā-eva	dispassionate making (them) only
pradiśasi tata:	(Thou) give then
kāmam-akhilam	desires all
praśānteṣu kṣipraṃ	to the dispassionate quickly
na khalu	not indeed
bhavadīye cyuti-kathā	to Thy devotee downfall does not come
O Consort of Ramaa! (Laxmi) Thy devotees are not easily blessed in this world. I know it to be so because prosperity generates pride in the passionate people. After making them dispassionate Thou do fulfill all their desires. Those who are already dispassionate, to them Thy blessings come quickly. There is no question of Thy devotee's downfall.
sadya: prasādaruṣitān vidhiśaṅkarādīn
kecidvibho nijaguṇānuguṇaṃ bhajanta: |
bhraṣṭā bhavanti bata kaṣṭamadīrghadṛṣṭyā
spaṣṭaṃ vṛkāsura udāharaṇaṃ kilāsmin ||2||
sadya: prasāda-ruṣitān	quickly pleased and angered
vidhi-śaṅkara-ādīn	Brahmaa Shiva and others
kecit-vibho	some people O Lord!
nija-guṇa-anuguṇam	in their own nature's accordance
bhajanta:	worshipping
bhraṣṭā:-bhavanti	disgrace attain to
bata kaṣṭam-	alas unfortunate (is this)
adīrgha-dṛṣṭyā	due to shortsightedness
spaṣṭaṃ vṛkāsura	(It is) clear (by) Vrikaasura
udāharaṇaṃ kila-asmin	example indeed in this (case)
O Lord! Brahamaa, Shiva and others who are pleased and angered quickly, are worshipped by people in accordance with their own nature. Alas! They are led to disgrace by their shortsightedness. This is indeed clear by the example of Vrikaasura.
śakunija: sa tu nāradamekadā
tvaritatoṣamapṛcchadadhīśvaram |
sa ca dideśa girīśamupāsituṃ
na tu bhavantamabandhumasādhuṣu ||3||
śakunija: sa	the son of Shakuni, he (Vrikaasura)
tu nāradam-ekadā	indeed to Naarada once
tvarita-toṣam-apṛcchat-	soon pleased asked (about)
adhīśvaram	the Deity
sa ca dideśa	and he indicated
girīśam-upāsituṃ	Shiva to worship
na tu bhavantam-	(and) not indeed Thee
abandhum-asādhuṣu	(who are) non supportive towards evil people
Vrikaasura, the son of Shakuni once asked Naarada as to which Deity was the easiest to please. Naarada instructed him to worship Shiva and not Thee who are not supportive towards evil minded people.
tapastaptvā ghoraṃ sa khalu kupita: saptamadine
śira: chitvā sadya: puraharamupasthāpya purata: |
atikṣudraṃ raudraṃ śirasi karadānena nidhanaṃ
jagannāthādvavre bhavati vimukhānāṃ kva śubhadhī: ||4||
tapa:-taptvā ghoraṃ	penance practicing very severe
sa khalu kupita:	he indeed in great anger
saptama-dine	on the seventh day
śira: chitvā	(his) head cutting off
sadya: puraharam-	immediately Shiva
upasthāpya purata:	making to appear in front
atikṣudraṃ raudraṃ	very mean and cruel
śirasi kara-dānena	on head placing (his) hand
nidhanaṃ	death
jagannāthāt-vavre	from the Lord of the universe (Shiva) sought (as a boon)
bhavati vimukhānāṃ	from Thee (those who are) indifferent
kva śubhadhī:	where is good sense
He indeed practiced severe penance and on the seventh day greatly angered, threatened to cut off his head and thus made Shiva appear before him immediately. From the Lord of the universe, Shiva, he sought a very mean and cruel boon that on who-so-ever's head he placed his hand would die immediately. How can good sense prevail upon people who are indifferent to Thee?
moktāraṃ bandhamukto hariṇapatiriva prādravatso'tha rudraṃ
daityāt bhītyā sma devo diśi diśi valate pṛṣṭhato dattadṛṣṭi: |
tūṣṇīke sarvaloke tava padamadhirokṣyantamudvīkṣya śarvaṃ
dūrādevāgratastvaṃ paṭuvaṭuvapuṣā tasthiṣe dānavāya ||5||
moktāraṃ	the one who releases
bandha-mukta:	from bondage released
hariṇapati:-iva	a lion as if
prādravat-sa-atha rudraṃ	rushed he then towards Shiva
daityāt bhītyā sma	by the Asura afraid being
deva: diśi diśi	the Lord in all directions
valate	ran about
pṛṣṭhata:-datta-dṛṣṭi:	towards the back looking
tūṣṇīke sarva-loke	as kept quiet all the world
tava padam-adhirokṣyantam-	Thy abode climbing up to
udvīkṣya śarvaṃ	seeing Shiva
dūrāt-eva-agrata:-tvaṃ	from far only, in front Thou
paṭu-vaṭu-vapuṣā	(in) a clever Brahamachari's guise
tasthiṣe dānavāya	stood (waiting) for the Asura
Like a lion who rushes towards the rescuer, Vrikaasura rushed towards Shiva. Lord Shiva ran about in all directions in panic of the Asura, and kept looking backwards. Everyone in the whole world kept quiet. Then from far Thou saw Shiva as he was about to reach Thy abode. Then, in the guise of a clever Brahmachaari Thou stood waiting for the Asura.
bhadraṃ te śākuneya bhramasi kimadhunā tvaṃ piśācasya vācā
sandehaścenmaduktau tava kimu na karoṣyaṅgulīmaṅgamaulau |
itthaṃ tvadvākyamūḍha: śirasi kṛtakara: so'patacchinnapātaṃ
bhraṃśo hyevaṃ paropāsiturapi ca gati: śūlino'pi tvameva ||6||
bhadraṃ te śākuneya	hail to you O son of Shakuni!
bhramasi kiṃ adhunā tvaṃ	(why are) running about now you
piśācasya vācā	on a ghost's words
sandeha:-cet-mat-uktau	doubt if there is in my words
tava kimu na karoṣi-	on your, why not do you do
aṅgulīm-aṅga-maulau	the finger, O dear One, on the head
itthaṃ tvat-vākya-mūḍha:	thus by Thy words fooled
śirasi kṛta-kara:	on head placing hand
sa:-apatat-chinna-pātaṃ	he fell (like) an uprooted tree
bhraṃśa:- hi-evaṃ	destruction indeed such
para-upāsitu:api	other (deities) worshipping indeed
ca gati:	and are a last resort
śūlina:-api tvam-eva	to Shankara also Thou alone
Hail to you O son of Shakuni! Why are you needlessly running about, placing your faith in this ghost? If you doubt my words, O dear One! Test for yourself by placing your fingers on your own head.' Befooled by these words of Thine, he placed his hand on his head and immediately fell down dead as an uprooted tree. Such is the fate of the people who worship other deities. What more, Thou are the ultimate refuge of even Shiva.
bhṛguṃ kila sarasvatīnikaṭavāsinastāpasā-
strimūrtiṣu samādiśannadhikasattvatāṃ veditum |
ayaṃ punaranādarāduditaruddharoṣe vidhau
hare'pi ca jihiṃsiṣau girijayā dhṛte tvāmagāt ||7||
bhṛguṃ kila	Bhrigu indeed
sarasvatī-nikaṭa-vāsina:-	living near (the river) Saraswati
tāpasā:-	the ascetics
tri-mūrtiṣu	among the Trinity
samādiśan-	instructed (Bhrigu)
adhika-sattvatāṃ vedituṃ	to know who is more inclined towards Saatvic gunas
ayaṃ puna:-anādarāt-	this (Bhrigu) again with non-respect
udita-ruddha-roṣe	(which) arose, and was controlled, the anger
vidhau	in Brahmaa (when)
hare-api ca	and in Shiva also
jihiṃsiṣau	eager to kill (Bhrigu)
girijayā dhṛte	by Paarvati restricted
tvām-agāt	to Thee went
Once the ascetics residing on the banks of the river Saraswati assigned sage Bhrigu to test who among the Trinity was more inclined towards Saatvic guna. Bhrigu went to Brahmaa who was enraged, but he controlled his anger, when Bhrigu showed his disrespect. Next he went to Shiva and behaved with him in the same manner. Shiva was eager to kill him but was restricted by Paarvati. Then Bhrigu went to Thee.
suptaṃ ramāṅkabhuvi paṅkajalocanaṃ tvāṃ
vipre vinighnati padena mudotthitastvam |
sarvaṃ kṣamasva munivarya bhavet sadā me
tvatpādacinhamiha bhūṣaṇamityavādī: ||8||
suptaṃ ramā-aṅka-bhuvi	sleeping on Laxmi's lap
paṅkajalocanaṃ tvāṃ	lotus eyed Thee
vipre vinighnati padena	when the sage hit by foot
mudā-utthita:-tvam	happily getting up Thou
sarvaṃ kṣamasva munivarya	everything forgive O great sage
bhavet sadā me	will be always my
tvat-pāda-cinham-iha	your foot mark here
bhūṣaṇam-iti-avādī:	decoration, thus Thou said
When Bhrigu went to Thee, O Lotus eyed! Thou were sleeping on Laxmi's lap. He hit Thee on the chest with his foot. Thou got up in good humour and asked for pardon for everything and told him that the mark of his foot would always remain as a decoration on his chest.
niścitya te ca sudṛḍhaṃ tvayi baddhabhāvā:
sārasvatā munivarā dadhire vimokṣam |
tvāmevamacyuta punaścyutidoṣahīnaṃ
sattvoccayaikatanumeva vayaṃ bhajāma: ||9||
niścitya te ca	and having decided they
sudṛḍhaṃ tvayi	firmly in Thee
baddhabhāvā:	anchoring devotion
sārasvatā:-munivarā:-	residing near the river Saraswati, the great sages
dadhire vimokṣam	attained liberation
tvām-evam-acyuta	to Thee, thus, O Changeless One!
puna:-acyuti-doṣa-hīnaṃ	again from the decay defect free
sattva-uccaya-eka-tanum-	of Saatvic and majestic one form
eva vayaṃ bhajāma:	alone I worship
The great ascetics residing near the Saraswati river decided that Thou were the most Saatvic of the Trinity. They firmly anchored their devotion into Thee and attained union with Thee. O Changeless One! Who are free from the shortcoming of decay, Thy exalted Saatvic form we worship.
jagatsṛṣṭyādau tvāṃ nigamanivahairvandibhiriva
stutaṃ viṣṇo saccitparamarasanirdvaitavapuṣam |
parātmānaṃ bhūman paśupavanitābhāgyanivahaṃ
paritāpaśrāntyai pavanapuravāsin paribhaje ||10||
jagat-sṛṣṭi-ādau	the universe's creation in the beginning of
tvāṃ nigama-nivahai:-	to Thee by the Vedas altogether
vandibhi:-iva	as by the minstrels as (in a king's court)
stutaṃ viṣṇo	praised O Vishnu!
sat-cit-parama-rasa-	Pure Consciousness Highest Bliss
nirdvaita-vapuṣam	undual embodiment
parātmānaṃ bhūman	the Supreme Being O Infinite One!
paśupa-vanitā-bhāgya-nivahaṃ	the cowherd women's merits' embodiment
paritāpa-śrāntyai	the sorrows to be removed
pavanapuravāsin	O Resident of Guruvaayur!
paribhaje	I intensely worship
O Vishnu! In the beginning of the creation of the universe, Thy praises were sung by the Vedas just as the minstrels in the king's court.O Infinite One! Thou are the Pure Consciousness Highest Bliss undual embodiment. Thou are also the personification of all the merits of the cowherd women put together. O Resident of Guruvaayur! I intensely worship Thee for the removal of all my sorrows.